In the previous clip,
we saw that just by adding a single Spring Boot starter dependency,
to our project,
Spring Boot configured Spring Security to provide form‑based
authentication and secured all the endpoints for us.
Additionally, it also created a test user for us to get started.
Basically, everything you would need on a new project.
Spring Boot achieved this by being very opinionated.
It notices changes in your configuration,
your code, last path,
and then makes assumptions on what you actually want to achieve.
In our case,
it noticed the Spring Security starter dependency was added and
hence assumed we wanted to secure our application.
Now this is achieved by configuration classes within Spring Boot,
such as this one, SecurityAutoConfiguration.
These configuration classes typically lay dormant
until certain conditions are met.
Example, here,
the ConditionalOnClass triggers this configuration class into
action when the DefaultAuthenticationEventPublisher class makes
it into your application's class path.
Hence why Spring Security magically appeared in our application
when we added this Spring Boot starter dependency.
This class then imports additional configuration classes,
like the SpringBootWebSecurityConfiguration class,
which determined that this was a web application and configured the web
security adapter, or the WebSecurityEnablerConfiguration,
which configured a Spring configuration class with the
EnableWebSecurity annotation and so forth.
Basically,
all the tedious boilerplate code and configuration
you would have to do manually.
In the UserDetailsServiceAutoConfiguration class,
the UserDetailsServiceAutoConfiguration class checked our application and
determined that we did not configure a user repository.
And without users, you can't authenticate.
So it created a default in‑memory implementation for us.
And here you can see it even printed out the password for us in the logs.
Thanks, Spring Boot.
Again,
the ConditionalOnMissingBean means that as soon as we
provide our own implementation like, for example,
maybe a database implementation or LDAP implementation,
Spring Boot will back off.
Now if you have worked with Spring in the past,
you would probably be well aware of what a pain in the debug it
used to be to maintain the correct dependencies,
the order, and to simply configure everything.
After 10 years working with Spring,
I definitely appreciate what Spring Boot is doing here. Next, let's take a closer look at the Spring Security architecture.